RHIDP-3970 - Authentication - Authenticating with Microsoft Azure (#492)
redhat-developer/red-hat-developers-documentation-rhdh: modules/authentication/proc-enabling-authentication-with-microsoft-azure.adoc

> [id="adding-azure-as-an-authentication-provider"]

Author: ```suggestion
[id="enabling-authentication-with-microsoft-azure"]
```

> [id="proc-adding-azure-as-an-authentication-provider"]

Author: ```suggestion
[id="adding-azure-as-an-authentication-provider"]
```

> = Enabling the Microsoft Azure authentication provider

Author: ```suggestion
= Enabling authentication with Microsoft Azure
```

.. On your *App registration* overview page, add a new *Web platform configuration*, with the configuration:

*Redirect URI*:: Enter the backend authentication URI set in {product-short}: `pass:c,a,q[https://_<APP_FQDN>_/api/auth/microsoft/handler/frame]`
*Front-channel logout URL*:: Leave blank.
*Implicit grant and hybrid flows*:: Leave all checkboxes cleared.

.. On the *API permissions* tab, click *Add Permission*, then add the following *Delegated permission* for the
*Microsoft Graph API*:
+
* `email`
* `offline_access`
* `openid`
* `profile`
* `User.Read`
* Optional custom scopes of the Microsoft Graph API that you define both here and in the {product-short} configuration (`app-config-rhdh.yaml`).
+
[NOTE]
====
Your company might require you to grant admin consent for these permissions.
Even if your company does not require admin consent, you might do so as it means users do not need to individually consent the first time they access backstage.
To grant admin consent, a directory admin must go to the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/user-admin-consent-overview[admin consent] page and click *Grant admin consent for COMPANY NAME*.
====

> 

Author: @JessicaJHee Is this step still relevant?

I cannot see this step if I follow instructions on Azure documentation in one the these docs:
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/quickstart-register-app?tabs=client-secret

Author: Steps reviewed and updated from screencast recorded by @albarbaro.

> :_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
> [id="proc-adding-azure-as-an-authentication-provider_{context}"]

Author: ```suggestion
[id="proc-adding-azure-as-an-authentication-provider"]
```

= Enabling the Microsoft Azure authentication provider

> {product} includes a Microsoft Azure authentication provider that can authenticate users by using OAuth.

Author: Fixed

.Prerequisites
. You have the permission to register an application in Microsoft Azure.
. You link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/{product-version}/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#assembly-add-custom-app-file-openshift_admin-rhdh[added a custom {product-short} application configuration].

.Procedure
. To allow {product-short} to authenticate with Microsoft Azure, create an OAuth Application in Microsoft Azure.

> .. Go to link:https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade[*Azure Portal > App registrations*], and create an *App Registration* for {product-short}.

Author: ```suggestion
.. Go to link:https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade[*Azure Portal > Identity > Applications > App registrations*], and link: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[register the {product-short} application by using the Azure portal].
```

> .. On your *App registration* overview page, add a new *Web platform configuration*, with the configuration:

Reviewer: I don't see it either from the overview page. Maybe we should specify to navigate to Manage->Authentication from the Overview page:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/543a523f-3ab5-4fab-b74e-079ddb7105d2)

> .. On your *App registration* overview page, add a new *Web platform configuration*, with the configuration:

Author: Seems it has changed since the initial docs were created.

I see something different (I have no running directory set up):

![Screenshot_2024-09-23_2](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3d82ed30-8f2b-498f-8dfa-74c8ff106b22)

> .. On your *App registration* overview page, add a new *Web platform configuration*, with the configuration:

Reviewer: I stand corrected on my previous comment. The Web platform sections appears on App Registration creation (or when a Redirect URL s created for the first time), so the steps are actually correct. The `Manage->Authentication from the Overview page:` path from is valid when using an existing app. 
<img width="892" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/28e6cf00-95b9-462c-a163-0c3b086b56e9">
<img width="1491" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7ec42c1a-1ebc-401e-b4e7-76dcde5579b2">

> .. To link: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[register the {product-short} application by using the Azure portal], go to link:https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade[*Azure Portal > Identity > Applications > App registrations*].

Author: ```suggestion
.. To link: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[register the {product-short} application by using the Azure portal], go to link:https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade[*Azure Portal > Identity > Identity management > App registrations*].
```

====

.. Go to the *Certificates & Secrets* page, then the *Client secrets* tab, and create a new client secret.

.. Save for the next step:
- **Directory (tenant) ID**
- **Application (client) ID**
- **Application (client) secret**

. To add your Microsoft Azure credentials to {product-short}, add the following key/value pairs to your {product-short} secrets, such as `secrets-rhdh`:
+
`AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID`:: Enter your saved *Directory (tenant) ID*.
`AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID`:: Enter your saved *Application (client) ID*.
`AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET`:: Enter your saved *Application (client) secret*.

. Set up the Microsoft Azure authentication provider in your {product-short} custom configuration, such as `app-config-rhdh`:
+
--
.`app-config-rhdh.yaml` fragment
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
auth:
  environment: production
  providers:
    microsoft:
      production:
        clientId: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID}
        clientSecret: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET}
        tenantId: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID}
signInPage: microsoft

> dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true

Reviewer 2: This conflicts with the production config.  I would rather have the example set this to false and have a link to the next section so users can follow how to ingest users.  We can have a note somewhere saying it's false by default but if you don't want to ingest users, then set it to true

Author: No, because in the user journey that we agreed upon, we want to enable the user to discover RHDH progressively.

After this procedure, the user should be able to use the application without ingesting users.

Later, the user can ingest users, and first thing will be to remove that line.

It might make sense to isolate this line in a dedicated fragment, maybe in a note.

Author: Removing from here, adding as suggestion

```suggestion
```

> dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true

Reviewer: It's probably better to suggest to configure the ingestion and this parameter to false first, then mention the `dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog` as a secondary option: I don't think it is intended as a production configuration.

----

`environment: production`::
Mark the environment as production to hide the **Guest** login in the {product-short} home page.

`clientId`, `clientSecret` and `tenantId`::

> Use your OpenShift secrets.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the {product-short} application information that you have created in Microsoft Azure and configured in OpenShift as secrets.
```

`signInPage: microsoft`::
Enable the Microsoft Azure provider as default sign-in provider.

`dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true`::
Enable authentication without provisioning users to the software catalog.

Optional: Consider adding following optional  fields:

`domainHint`::
Optional for single-tenant applications.
You can reduce login friction for users with accounts in multiple tenants by automatically filtering out accounts from other tenants.
If you want to use this parameter for a single-tenant application, uncomment and enter the tenant ID.
If your application registration is multi-tenant, leave this parameter blank.
For more information, see link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/home-realm-discovery-policy[Home Realm Discovery].
+

> .`app-config-rhdh.yaml` fragment with optional `domainHint field

Author: ```suggestion
.`app-config-rhdh.yaml` fragment with optional `domainHint` field
```

[id="enabling-authentication-with-microsoft-azure"]
= Enabling authentication with Microsoft Azure

> {product} includes a Microsoft Azure authentication provider that can authenticate users by using OAuth.

Author: It does not add more clarity.

.Prerequisites
. You have the permission to register an application in Microsoft Azure.
. You link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/{product-version}/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#assembly-add-custom-app-file-openshift_admin-rhdh[added a custom {product-short} application configuration].

.Procedure

> . To allow {product-short} to authenticate with Microsoft Azure, link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[create an OAuth Application in Microsoft Azure].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To allow {product-short} to authenticate with Microsoft Azure, link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[create an OAuth application in Microsoft Azure].
```

.. In the Azure portal go to link:https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade[*App registrations*], create a **New registration** with the configuration:
+
**Name**:: The application name in Azure, such as __<My {product-short}>__.

> .. On the *Home > App registrations > __<My {product-short}>__ > Manage > Authentication* page, *Add a platform*, with the configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. On the *Home > App registrations > __<My {product-short}>__ > Manage > Authentication* page, *Add a platform*, with the following configuration:
```

> *Redirect URI*:: Enter the backend authentication URI set in {product-short}: `pass:c,a,q[{my-product-url}/api/auth/microsoft/handler/frame]`

Reviewer 3: I would suggest converting these into substeps rather than using a description list.

Author: This is one step: this is in one single configuration screen.

*Front-channel logout URL*:: Leave blank.
*Implicit grant and hybrid flows*:: Leave all checkboxes cleared.

.. On the *Home > App registrations > __<My {product-short}>__ > Manage > API permissions* page, *Add a Permission*, then add the following *Delegated permission* for the *Microsoft Graph API*:
+
* `email`
* `offline_access`
* `openid`
* `profile`
* `User.Read`

> * Optional custom scopes of the Microsoft Graph API that you define both here and in the {product-short} configuration (`app-config-rhdh.yaml`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Optional custom scopes for the Microsoft Graph API that you define both in this section and in the {product-short} configuration (`app-config-rhdh.yaml`).
```

+
[NOTE]
====

> Your company might require you to grant admin consent for these permissions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You might be required to grant administrator consent for these permissions.
```

Author: This would remove information and clarity.

Even if your company does not require admin consent, you might do so as it means users do not need to individually consent the first time they access backstage.

> To grant admin consent, a directory admin must go to the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/user-admin-consent-overview[admin consent] page and click *Grant admin consent for COMPANY NAME*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To grant administrator consent, a directory administrator must go to the link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/user-admin-consent-overview[admin consent] page and click *Grant admin consent for COMPANY NAME*.
```

====

.. On the *Home > App registrations > __<My {product-short}>__ > Manage > Certificates & Secrets* page, in the *Client secrets* tab, create a *New client secret*.

> .. Save for the next step:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. Save - **Directory (tenant) ID**,  **Application (client) ID**, **Application (client) secret** for the next step.
```

- **Directory (tenant) ID**
- **Application (client) ID**
- **Application (client) secret**

. To add your Microsoft Azure credentials to {product-short}, add the following key/value pairs to your {product-short} secrets, such as `secrets-rhdh`:
+
`AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID`:: Enter your saved *Directory (tenant) ID*.
`AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID`:: Enter your saved *Application (client) ID*.
`AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET`:: Enter your saved *Application (client) secret*.

. Set up the Microsoft Azure authentication provider in your {product-short} custom configuration, such as `app-config-rhdh`:
+
--
.`app-config-rhdh.yaml` fragment
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
auth:
  environment: production
  providers:
    microsoft:
      production:

>         clientId: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        clientId: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID} <2>
```

>         clientSecret: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        clientSecret: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET} <2>
```

>         tenantId: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        tenantId: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID} <2>
```

> signInPage: microsoft

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
signInPage: microsoft <3>
```

----

`environment: production`::
Mark the environment as production to hide the **Guest** login in the {product-short} home page.

> `clientId`, `clientSecret` and `tenantId`::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> Use the {product-short} application information that you have created in Microsoft Azure and configured in OpenShift as secrets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<2> Use the {product-short} application information you created in Microsoft Azure and configured in OpenShift as secrets.
```

> `signInPage: microsoft`::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> Enable the Microsoft Azure provider as default sign-in provider.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<3> Enable the Microsoft Azure provider as the default sign-in provider.
```

Optional: Consider adding following optional fields:

`dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true`::
+
To enable authentication without requiring to provision users in the {product-short} software catalog.
+

> WARNING: Use this option to explore {product-short} features, but do not use it in production.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WARNING: Use `dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog` to explore {product-short} features, but do not use it in production.
```

  providers:
    microsoft:
      production:
        clientId: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_ID}
        clientSecret: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET}
        tenantId: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID}
signInPage: microsoft
dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true
----

`domainHint`::
Optional for single-tenant applications.
You can reduce login friction for users with accounts in multiple tenants by automatically filtering out accounts from other tenants.
If you want to use this parameter for a single-tenant application, uncomment and enter the tenant ID.
If your application registration is multi-tenant, leave this parameter blank.
For more information, see link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/home-realm-discovery-policy[Home Realm Discovery].
+
.`app-config-rhdh.yaml` fragment with optional `domainHint` field
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
auth:
  environment: production
  providers:
    microsoft:
      production:
        domainHint: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID}
----

`additionalScopes`::
Optional for additional scopes.
To add scopes for the application registration, uncomment and enter the list of scopes that you want to add.

> The default and mandatory value is `['user.read']`.

Reviewer 4: > The default and mandatory value is `['user.read']`.

What's the source for this? From what I understand the default scopes are defined [here](https://github.com/backstage/backstage/blob/0d74ac9e71e890ed1bfbd9e0a30cb550c67edada/packages/core-app-api/src/apis/implementations/auth/microsoft/MicrosoftAuth.ts#L59-L65) and include: 

* `email`
* `offline_access`
* `openid`
* `profile`
* `User.Read`

Author: Nice catch 
```suggestion
The default and mandatory value lists: `'openid', 'offline_access', 'profile', 'email', 'User.Read'`.
```

+
.`app-config-rhdh.yaml` fragment with optional `additionalScopes` field
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,+attributes"]
----
auth:
  environment: production
  providers:
    microsoft:
      production:
        additionalScopes:
           - Mail.Send
----
--

[NOTE]
====

> Optional for environments with restrictions on outgoing access, such as firewall rules.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This step is optional for environments with outgoing access restrictions, such as firewall rules.
```

> If your environment has outgoing access restrictions make sure your Backstage backend has access to the following hosts:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 If your environment has such restrictions, ensure that your {product-very-short} backend can access the following hosts:
```

> * `login.microsoftonline.com`: To get and exchange authorization codes and access tokens.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `login.microsoftonline.com`: For obtaining and exchanging authorization codes and access tokens.
```

> * `graph.microsoft.com`: To fetch user profile information (as seen in this source code).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `graph.microsoft.com`: For retrieving user profile information (as referenced in the source code).
```

> If this host is unreachable, users might see an _Authentication failed, failed to fetch user profile_ error when they attempt to log in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If this host is unreachable, you might see an _Authentication failed, failed to fetch user profile_ error when attempting to log in.
```

[id="enabling-authentication-with-microsoft-azure"]
= Enabling authentication with Microsoft Azure

{product} includes a Microsoft Azure authentication provider that can authenticate users by using OAuth.

.Prerequisites
. You have the permission to register an application in Microsoft Azure.
. You link:https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_developer_hub/{product-version}/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#assembly-add-custom-app-file-openshift_admin-rhdh[added a custom {product-short} application configuration].

.Procedure
. To allow {product-short} to authenticate with Microsoft Azure, create an OAuth Application in Microsoft Azure.

> .. To link: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/entra/identity-platform/scenario-web-app-sign-user-app-registration?tabs=aspnetcore#register-an-app-by-using-the-azure-portal[register the {product-short} application by using the Azure portal], go to link:https://portal.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade[*Azure Portal > Identity > Identity management > App registrations*] and click **New registration**.

Author: @JessicaJHee I need your help again

With my Red Hat account, this iswhat I see when I log in to Entra:

![Screenshot_2024-09-30_2](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dbacd452-af77-457e-9198-a0d50cf9de28)

I do not see how to do this sequence: *Azure Portal > Identity > Identity management > App registrations*  link:https://entra.azure.com/#view/Microsoft_AAD_RegisteredApps/ApplicationsListBlade  and click **New registration**.

I do not see how do to this sequence either: *Microsoft Entra ID > Manage > App registrations > click on + New registration*

.. Go to the *Certificates & Secrets* page, then the *Client secrets* tab, and create a new client secret.

> .. Save your **Application ID**, *Client secret*, and **Tenant ID** for the next step.

Reviewer 4: It may be helpful to use the name as it appears in the Azure instance:
`Application (client) ID` and `Directory (tenant) ID`.

<img width="158" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/66b88110-57b8-4cc1-9b07-06f54d7bcccb">

Or use **Application ID** and **Directory ID** for consistency.

Author: Done

        clientSecret: ${AUTH_AZURE_CLIENT_SECRET}
        tenantId: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID}
        # domainHint: ${AUTH_AZURE_TENANT_ID} # <2>
        # additionalScopes: # <3>
        #   - Mail.Send
signInPage: microsoft # <4>
dangerouslyAllowSignInWithoutUserInCatalog: true # <5>
----
+
<1> Marking the environment as production hides the **Guest** login in the {product-short} home page.
<2> Optional for single-tenant applications. You can reduce login friction for users with accounts in multiple tenants by automatically filtering out accounts from other tenants. If you want to use this parameter for a single-tenant application, uncomment and enter the tenant ID. If your application registration is multi-tenant, leave this parameter blank. For more information, see link:https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/manage-apps/home-realm-discovery-policy[Home Realm Discovery].
<3> Optional for additional scopes. To add scopes for the application registration, uncomment and enter the list of scopes that you want to add.
The default and mandatory value is `['user.read']`.
<4> To enable the Microsoft Azure provider as default sign-in provider.

> <5> To enable authentication without provisioning the software catalog.

Reviewer 4: Could be useful to specify the provisioning of **users** specifically.

Author: Today I understand better. Of course:

```suggestion
<5> To enable authentication without provisioning users to the software catalog.
```
